ON CREATION

In the beginning there was nothing, and as such the concept of there being something did yet not exist.
Out of the stillness a faint consciousness arose, and there was nothing It could contemplate, so It contemplated itself.
From Its meditation the First Concept crystallized: "I am nothing."

Then, the Godhead went on to contemplate the first Concept. 

The question It pondered was: "If I am nothing, then what is it which I am not?"
And after countless eons, having explored every conceivable answer to Its question, 
the Godhead came to the realization that nothing was no longer, as everything had taken its place.
Thus was the Second Concept: "I am change."

As It did before, the Godhead went on to contemplate the second Concept. 

The question It pondered was: "If I am change, then what is it which I ought to change?"
And the Godhead saw that nothing couldn't be changed, and thus everything could. 
But since everything was still shrunk down to the size of nothing, there was no way for change to manifest itself.
The Godhead challenged this notion and altered it, dividing everything into all things, and giving each its own place.
Change could now happen, for the Godhead had willed it.
Thus was third Concept: "I am law."

And the Godhead arranged each thing in an orderly manner, for law brings order, such that structure and patterns could be observed from all perspectives.
Satisfied with Its creation, the Godhead went into a deep sleep. 
There Its consciousness split, and each part split in turn, until all parts were no longer aware of their divine nature.
Then each part went on to contemplate creation from Its own limited perspective, and as They contemplated They grew, and as They grew They took shapes that would fit within the Arrangement.
Thus was born the self, on a path to conquer the three Concepts in reverse order as to merge once again with the Godhead.

ON CULTURE

SAKHAL
The first people were simple and they had simple needs. As such, the first religions were simple, and they had simple gods.
The Sakhal, a now-extinct race of bipedal reptiles that had achieved sentience long before everyone else, is credited with being the first culture to have practiced religious rituals.
The earliest Sakhal remains have been unearthed along various mountain ranges, suggesting that their species first evolved there and that their people were nomads, perhaps due to the scarcity of prey and vegetation.
Cave paintings of hunt and harvest indicate that the Sakhal were omnivores, while oral tradition that managed to survive until the dawn of literacy tells us that their religious belief was a form of animism.
Sakhal thought that everything, from concrete to abstract and from still to alive, possessed a distinct spiritual essence. It was this essence that made it be, and for the essence to be reclaimed the thing it embodied had to stop being.
As such, in the event of death (be it animal, Sakhal or purely conceptual), they practiced rituals that they thought would channel this essence-to-be-reclaimed into themselves, helping them grow spiritually.
They did not build temples, but they dug graves for their kin and would often leave items that were important to the deceased or a loved one, for they would help them remember their purpose in the next life.

ON SENTIENT RACES

Sakhal (Extinct): Reptilian, average stature, cold blooded, bipedal, primitive, one with nature. Animist religion, lived along mountain ranges.
Simeans (Extinct): Simian, pygmy, warm blooded, bipedal, primitive, belligerent. Ancestor worship, lived primarily in rainforests and jungles.

Essakhal (<- Sakhal): Serpent from the waist below, slender humanoid torso.
Chamelikhal (<- Sakhal): Sentient, large chameleons that can stand on two feet. Placid by nature, they're capable of changing pigmentation as to merge with the environment. Despite not being belligerent, they are capable of tending deadly ambushes and they're good spies.
Kratkhal (<- Sakhal): 


Humans (<- Simekhal): Men.
Dwarves (<- Humans): Short and bulky, poor eyesight but exceptional hearing due living deep into the earth.